Nikola, the handball world agrees that
you are one of the best, and for some,
the best handball player
of the modern era.
Simply, the number of trophies,
both club and national team,
and when you add individual
awards and, above all,
the duration of your career,
the many years you played
at the highest level, it truly places
you on the pedestal of handball legends.
How do you feel now in your
first season when there are no more
big responsibilities you were
so used to? -I feel great.
For the first time, I live without that
inner feeling of needing to be
the best on the court, in handball.
There is no longer
that sport and motivation.
Every day, I’m learning how to live
without the pressure of having
to win games and win titles.
I’m slowly getting used to
normal life. It’s nice. I enjoy it.
I spend more time with my family.
I have more time for my wife,
for my children, for friends.
I’m learning how to use
all the knowledge
I gained through sports
and throughout my career,
not only in professional sports
but also in working with children,
the media, and companies.
I am adapting to my new life
and new rules. -Bravo.
Thank you for hosting us here in Paris.
Many players, when they finish their
careers as professional handball players,
immediately start working
as directors or coaches in the sport.
Others take a long break, but you’ve
said that you don’t miss handball.
That’s good.
However, it would be a shame
for you and for handball if,
in the near future,
you don’t return to it.
Because athletes and children
need their childhood idols
to still be present in the sport.
I don't feel like I don't miss handball,
but I don't miss the competition.
You know how it is, that athlete
mentality pushes you to be the best
and to give everything you’ve got.
To be better than the person opposite you.
And better than all the other teams.
I don’t miss that mentality.
That feeling that I’m only happy
when I win and when I win a medal.
I don’t miss that.
I always followed the desire to be
the best and to have the best career.
But I don’t miss that anymore.
I don’t miss sport and handball because
I watch handball games every day.
I’m still an ambassador
for Paris Saint-Germain,
my son also plays handball.
I come to the games,
and I watch handball on TV.
I have a contract with beIN Sports,
which is a French TV channel
that broadcasts handball matches.
At beIN Sports, I participate
as an expert commentator.
I don’t miss handball,
because I never really left it.
Together with my brother,
I founded a handball academy.
Your time is filled. -What I don't
miss is professional handball.
I know that I could probably be
a good coach, because I had
the opportunity to learn a lot from
the coaches who trained me.
I know that I could be a good coach.
But being a coach is very hard.
My professional career
lasted almost 24 years.
So I needed a break from
playing sports professionally.
I understand. Because it’s not easy...
It’s like some kind of "hangover".
You actually live your whole
life on a sports schedule.
It’s not just about training,
adrenaline, and matches.
You also have to think about
nutrition, rest, sleep, waking up.
And respecting all of that is not easy.
I’m sure that later you’ll get
back into handball even more.
But let’s go back to the period
of your life when you were in Niš.
You were born in Niš in 1984,
your father Branko is Croatian
from the area around Trogir.
He was a handball goalkeeper and signed
a contract with RK Mehanika from Niš.
There he met your mother Radmila,
who was finishing her medical studies,
when you were 3.5 years old,
and after that, you moved to Paris.
Do you remember that period
when you lived in Niš,
or were you simply
too young to recall it?
I was too young to remember anything.
I remember some fragments,
but I’m not sure if those memories
are related to Niš or to a place
near Trogir, where my father is from.
I remember some...
-Fragments. -Yes, fragments.
But I don’t remember everything,
because we traveled a lot.
We would go to Niš,
where part of our family was,
then to Trogir, Strasbourg, Colmar.
After that, we moved to Montpellier.
We traveled a lot and changed locations.
I remember a lot of things,
but I don’t know which year
it was and when exactly
something happened.
The only thing I remember is that
I was always with my family,
my father, my mother,
and my brother Luka.
We were very close to each other.
That meant a lot to me
and helped me a lot. -Yes.
We loved each other a lot.
-You know that, I’ll help you...
I want to give you an idea of how good
the sport was in the former Yugoslavia.
You were born in April 1984.
Did you know that in December 1983,
a football match was played in Niš
between Radnički and Hajduk?
But it was a UEFA Cup match,
which is the same as today’s Europa League.
It was the round of 16, the third round.
Dragan Stojković Piksi was playing
for Radnički at that time.
However, Hajduk won 2:0 in Niš.
The goals were scored by
Zlatko Vujović and Zoran Vulić.
Then in Split, the result was again
2:0, with Zlatko Vujović scoring.
I remember that, and that was
around the time you were born.
How was your growing up in Strasbourg?
You came there at 3.5 years old.
How was it for you, growing up
as a foreigner in France?
I never felt like a foreigner.
I know my father and mother...
My father always said that
it was very important for us to
integrate into French society.
That we had to learn
the French language.
We were always very
proud of our roots.
Of the former Yugoslavia,
Croatia, and Serbia.
All those countries are ours.
But at the same time,
my father was proud
when we got French citizenship.
And when we became part
of the great French nation.
I never felt like a foreigner.
I always felt like a Frenchman.
Half French, half Yugoslav.
I think that helped me a lot
and broadened my horizons.
So I always respected all nations
and those who were different from me.
That gave us strength,
and I never felt like a foreigner.
You came to France at 3.5
years old, and your father got a job
as a handball coach, right?
That’s right.
In Strasbourg, and of course, you
started playing handball right away.
You often say that your father is
the most important person in your life.
Your mother says that
your father was always
an advocate of order,
hard work, and discipline.
He was strict and fair.
It’s clear that you also fell
in love with handball.
How do you remember him?
I remember him as the best role model,
and at the same time, he was my father.
Later, when we moved from
Strasbourg to Frontignan,
a town near Montpellier,
he became my sports teacher
in school and my handball coach.
So I couldn’t have had
a better role model than him.
As you said, he was from
the "old school" and believed
that everything could be
achieved if you worked,
if you behaved well
on the court and at school,
if you respected coaches,
referees, and opponents.
At the same time, he was a philosopher
of life and had a positive energy.
My father taught me discipline,
but at the same time,
he taught me to enjoy life.
Because life is beautiful.
And from my mother, I inherited
that inner fire, which I notice
in other athletes from
the former Yugoslavia.
That drives them to be the best
and to achieve great results.
I couldn’t have had a better combination
than my father and mother.
And growing up in France
really broadened my horizons.
I had the opportunity
to see other cultures.
I had that double strength.
I believe I couldn’t have had
a better family than mine. -Yes.
Mom always says
that handball was everything.
You woke up and went to sleep
with it on your mind.
You had a solid platform.
Your dad was your coach,
then after your training sessions,
you'd watch your dad train,
then you would also train at home,
watch video tapes, compare yourself,
and even ask your dad:
"Am I better than this?"
You were always setting goals.
It was always just handball, handball...
Were the boys you hung out with
also into handball?
Yes, a lot of them played handball,
or they joined because
they were my friends.
Because my dad was a coach,
I'm convinced that if my dad
had been a basketball or football coach,
I would've followed that sport.
I understand that...
-I know that a lot...
A big part of what I've done in my
career is because of my family
and wanting my dad to be proud of me...
-To prove yourself to him, right?
Exactly, to prove myself to him, to
prove that maybe I was better than him.
You're always looking for your parents'
love, even though they're showing it.
But I think that gave me
a lot of motivation.
I did everything for him,
for my mom, for my brother,
and of course, I was lucky enough to
have my younger brother by my side.
We played handball together, tennis,
all sorts of sports at home after practice.
I honestly couldn't have had
a better childhood.
I also witnessed how my mom
and dad gave us everything.
My dad played in the former Yugoslavia,
he was a national team player.
And my mom got her degree to be a
doctor, but when they came to France,
their achievements
weren't recognized there...
My dad coached in the second league,
and later he worked in Frantignan
for the fourth or fifth division.
And my mom couldn't be a doctor because
they didn't recognize her diplomas.
I saw how they gave everything they had,
how their professional lives
were so different
from what they had back in
the former Yugoslavia.
They did all of that for the family.
It wasn't just a sacrifice,
it was everything they gave for us.
But it's a sacrifice for you...
That really had an influence on me,
to give something back to them.
And throughout my career,
that has been a big motivation.
Yes, and it's really interesting.
Mom says exactly that.
Handball was important, but so were
work habits and responsibilities.
Of course, handball matters,
but school had to be taken care of too,
possibly with more difficulty there...
You, as a kid, learned French
faster than your mom and dad. -Yes.
Because little kids are like sponges.
They told you and Luka:
"We can't help you with school anymore.
You have to do it on your own." That
gave you responsibility, obligations,
and work habits that would later
help you in handball.
Exactly. Like you said, we spoke French
faster and better than our parents.
We did our homework
on our own at home.
School was like a competition for us.
We wanted to be the best in school,
and in our class...
We always had the best grades.
It mattered to us to be the best,
not only in sport but also in school,
because that's where we showed
our family that we succeeded.
Something our parents passed on to us
was to always be the best, everywhere.
We always wanted to compare
ourselves with others
and show that we were better than them.
I remember when my dad would
tell me about his career,
how he played in Metković
for a long time.
At the time, we were watching Croatia
win the Olympic Games in 1996.
Patrik Čavar was playing,
and he was my idol.
My dad always told me when he played
in Metković, Patrik was a kid there.
I'd always ask: "Dad, am I better than
Patrik when he was my age?"
And he'd say: "Okay, he was good,
you're not bad either,
but you have to train a lot
to catch up to him."
I always had that competitive mindset,
comparing myself to everyone,
always having to be better than
other kids in school, in handball...
Did other sports interest you?
I mean, this was the early '90s, right?
In France, football was big, basketball
not so much, rugby was present too,
and there were individual sports too.
For example, in Marseille,
you had Piksi Stojković, Bokšić,
and Zidane, Cantona,
Ginola are there.
And you had posters of
Jackson Richardson on your wall.
Yes, I had Jackson Richardson's poster.
I had posters of a lot of players
from the former Yugoslavia.
I know I had a poster
of Croatian players like
Čavar, Nenad Peruničić,
Jovanović, Skrivić.
We talked a lot about handball at home.
We always used to follow dad,
and go to some games where legends from
the former Yugoslavia or France played.
Dad would talk to them,
and we'd see all of that...
And that just added to everything.
-Of course, of course.
My dad was a role model,
and Luka and I wanted to impress him.
I remember when
we were living there,
I'm not sure which part of Strasbourg it
was, but Piksi had his surgery there,
and we went to see him.
I remember Luka crawling under
the bed, and the bed fell over...
We were worried it might
mess up his surgery.
So those stories were always there,
and dad always talked with great pride
about the former Yugoslavia
and all those athletes.
Handball was a real sport there,
it was respected.
But in France at the time,
handball wasn't that big.
It was hard for me as a kid
to follow those games,
watch Jackson and the clubs I loved.
But I knew, and it was also motivation
for me to make handball a big sport
in France through my career,
not just football and the other sports.
I wanted people in France
to respect handball
the way it was respected
in the former Yugoslavia.
That dedication you had from the start,
as your mom said...
You trained all day,
always thinking about handball.
Dad didn't want you to go to the gym
when you were going through puberty
because it was too early for your body.
So, you made your own little imitation
gym in your room with a weight machine.
Yes.
And then you moved
to Montpellier. Why?
Was it because it was
a good handball environment,
or was it because the climate
was better than in Strasbourg?
I always thought it was a decision
made by both mom and dad,
but mom explained to me that she
actually wanted to move to Montpellier.
We were in Strasbourg where my dad
was playing and coaching.
It was the second league, and they were
fighting to move up to the first league.
Then we moved to Kolbsheim,
a town about 20-30 km from Strasbourg,
and we lived there for two years.
After that, dad thought about
returning either to Trogir or Niš,
but mom wanted to stay in France.
She didn't want to live in Alsace
anymore, she wanted sun, the sea,
and somehow they found
that club near Montpellier.
They were playing in the fifth division,
but I think through some connections,
someone knew the president of the club.
The president found my dad
a job as a coach in a school.
So, we moved down there,
and at first, mom didn't work,
but later she found a job
in a retirement home as a nurse,
and that's where we stayed.
We lived there, and mom
still lives near Montpellier.
I have a house there,
and so does Luka.
That's where we played,
and we still feel like it's home.
We had those summers by the sea...
I'm curious about
your thoughts on something,
not just from your example,
but also in general.
Your father was
a handball player, right?
Often, the children of elite athletes
follow in their footsteps,
but many break under the pressure
of living up to the family name
or the stories surrounding them.
There are prejudices, and people say:
"He's here because of his father."
Did you ever feel that? Or not?
Was it hard carrying
the name Karabatić?
It wasn't hard for me.
It was an honor because I saw how
the handball players in France
looked up to my dad
and how they respected him.
That brought me a lot of motivation.
It wasn't hard because dad
was always there to calm me down,
even when I was the best. He would tell
me that if I had the ambition
to become an elite player,
I had to work hard.
Being the best when I was young
didn't mean I'd stay the best.
He told me that if I had that dream
and that goal in life,
the path would be long.
You can achieve anything in life,
but you have to work for it
and be strict with yourself.
So, it was never hard for me.
It was always a motivation.
I always knew I had a father
who was great,
and at the same time
coaching 4th or 5th division.
There’s no ego in our family.
My father played for the national team
but still wants to coach kids,
or 5th division teams.
That was a big role model for me.
To see my father is not the type
who gets arrogant because
he won something in his life.
He was always kind to everyone,
always gave his best
to help others, help the kids.
That was a big role model for me.
I know I have that at home.
To see he’s a big star,
but still behaves the same
towards everyone.
That helped me a lot to never
think that I’m,
even if I’m the best in what I do,
never think I’m the best.
That I’m better than you in life.
-I asked Ivanišević the same.
Then your career starts
and lasts over 20 years, right?
Even if it lasts that long, can you...
Every career has few moments
that push you forward,
open something for you,
or sometimes it happens
it holds you back.
What decisions helped you
that were crucial in your career?
I remember, I was very lucky
because my career started at 17.
At 18 I was in the national team,
at 19 I won the Champions League.
It went brutally upwards.
But, when I look back
there is one moment, I was
young, maybe 15 years old.
Until then I was always the best,
in every game I played,
in every team I played for.
It was some regional selection
where I played one match.
I missed one or two shots.
Didn’t play well. We finished
the game, dad was always there.
Then we talked after the match,
analysed how it was.
He asked me if I was happy
with the game. I told him I wasn’t.
Then he asked me if I knew
why he wasn’t happy.
I said "no, I missed,
didn’t play well."
He said "no, I’m not happy
because you missed two shots.
Then you stopped playing,
got scared. Pressure was too big
so you wouldn’t miss more
and then you stopped."
If your goal is to be the best in the world
and play for the national team,
and in a small game, one or two
misses break you down,
then it’s over, you won’t make it.
Stress will be too big, pressure too.
Better to quit right now.
Think about it and tomorrow
tell me what you decided."
That was the first time dad put me...
On the spot. -Against the wall.
I had to decide. That was
very important for me,
because I said then "No, dad,
I want to move forward."
I told myself "If I don’t succeed,
I’ll be scared on the court."
My goal was after every game
to give my best on the court.
To always try and move forward
and if I miss, it’s fine.
To keep moving forward and never stop.
That really pushed me a lot.
Actually, that moment was very important
for me, because from that point on
I was never afraid on the court.
Even though I was 16 or 17 years old,
I was already playing in the first division
and by 18 I was in the national team.
I was never afraid to try.
-To take responsibility,
which marked you throughout
your whole career.
It's always difficult for young players.
They're always afraid.
They're playing with players
they had posters of in their rooms.
Then they get scared. For me, that was
my strength, because I was never afraid.
I wanted to succeed in that.
That moment was very important to me.
Incredible. What you mentioned, when you
won the Champions League with Montpellier,
and in the final, which was played over
two legs, you scored 17 goals. -Yes.
As a young player,
that really launched you.
You mentioned that your father
played in Metković. -Yes.
Was your move to Kiel connected to that,
because Zvonimir Noka Serdarušić,
a top Croatian coach, was there?
Is there a connection between your father
and Noka from Metković or not?
You know how it was
in the former Yugoslavia.
All athletes were connected.
My father and Noka didn’t play together
or against each other,
but they knew each other. Of course,
that influenced my move to the club a lot.
As well as my decision
to sign for Kiel.
I was very young then.
I was 20 years old.
A year before that,
the coach from Pamplona came.
At that time,
Pamplona was the best team.
Jackson Richardson played there.
Nedeljko Jovanović too,
and later Ivano Balić also played there.
In 2003 we won the Champions League
against... -When you scored 17 goals.
They called me to join them. My father
and I always talked things through.
He said OK, of course we’ll hear their
offer, but he thought it was too soon,
and not the right moment to go there.
I still had a lot to learn in Montpellier.
When Noka and Kiel called, then I felt
that was the right moment.
My father always told me that
money isn’t the most important thing.
Money and contract conditions
shouldn’t be decisive for where I play.
First I had to look at where I could
develop. Which club was the best
for my progress and reaching my goal,
to become the best in the world,
and where I could learn the most.
Money would come later.
If you’re good, that will come.
That’s secondary.
I remember when Noka called,
my father said that’s the right club,
the right coach for me, he can
take me to a higher level. -Yes.
We made all those decisions together.
My father, mother, Luka.
We talked a lot. I was young then,
20 years old.
I didn’t know anything
about life and it’s hard
if you don’t have
good people around you
to help you make the right
decisions for your career.
Was the German league stronger
than the French one back then? -Yes.
At that time, the Bundesliga
was the strongest in the world.
There was also the Spanish league,
very strong, with Barcelona, San Antonio,
Pamplona, Leon, all those big clubs.
But the Bundesliga always...
I think that’s because
of the respect for handball,
because in Kiel we had 10,000...
-Fans. -Fans.
Every game we played in Gummersbach,
in Cologne in front of 20,000 people,
in Hamburg 14,000. -The atmosphere there.
-The atmosphere was always...
It was always an honor for me to see those
full arenas, people who love our sport.
I always wanted to experience that.
That also made a difference.
Many say you went to Noka
to become the best player in the world.
That's exactly what happened in the end.
Against Flensburg, you score 16 goals.
You win your second of three
Champions League titles.
After that, you return to Montpellier.
Then you briefly go to Aix. -Yes.
After that, Barcelona, right?
Then you return to Paris.
With Barcelona, you win
the Champions League.
You return to Paris, where you continue
your impressive career. Like Jordan.
That's three Champions League titles
in three different countries. -Yes.
Sixteen French championships,
four German, two Spanish.
If I'm not mistaken, only one year
you didn’t win the championship. -Yes.
That was 2013, right?
-That was the 2012/2013 season.
That's when the scandal happened.
-That's right. -I left Montpellier then.
I went to Aix, who were fighting to stay
in the league. Then I moved to Barcelona.
Barcelona didn’t want to pay a transfer fee.
They said they wanted me,
but I had to be free. Montpellier wanted to
terminate my contract because of the scandal.
So I went to Aix. They bought out
my contract for maybe 50,000.
From Aix I went to Barcelona as a free agent.
That year I didn’t win the championship,
but we were fighting to stay
in the first league.
Aix were supposed to be relegated.
We saved the club. Luka played there too.
Aix are still in the first league.
They have a new arena.
They played in the European Cup
two years ago. We saved the club,
and a new dynamic was born. That title
I didn’t win is the only one I’m missing.
But the emotions were stronger
because we saved the club.
That club is now one of the best
in France when it comes to handball.
They have a new arena, they’re a big club,
many fans, and so on.
Luka and I were there at the beginning
of that story, and it means a lot to us.
So, a return to Paris is coming,
and a very emotional farewell
in the arena, in 2024. It’s a shame
your father wasn’t there.
He left too soon.
Do you miss him?
Of course I miss him a lot,
but I worked a lot on getting over it.
It’s always been really hard for me,
because when your father leaves too soon,
there’s so much you don’t get
to experience with him.
He didn’t even get to see my children.
Of course that’s hard,
but I’ve worked a lot on myself
so that I can feel happy
for having had such a father,
who gave me so much.
I realized that he had seen in advance
what was going to happen
and what my career would be like.
He knew that Luka
would be with me,
that he would start playing
with me in Montpellier.
Even though he didn’t live to see
our first results with the national team,
he knew, a few months
before he passed away,
that Luka would be
called up to the national team.
So that means a lot to me.
I know that he saw
it all in advance,
and that now he’s watching
from somewhere.
In the beginning,
it was really hard.
Because when your father is your
role model, your coach, your agent,
your motivation-everything-
and then he’s no longer there,
you’re left without all of it.
You’re alone.
I had to start making decisions
on my own and find my own path,
both in sports and outside of it.
It was really hard for me,
but now I’m happy,
because I’m aware that
I wouldn’t be here without him.
I focus more on the positive sides
than the negative ones.
I know my father was always
a positive person, so I know
he wouldn’t want us all to be sad
just because he’s no longer here.
Yeah, but 56 years,
that’s really early.
The number of trophies says a lot
about the greats and the leaders.
I can see that from your story too.
Those are the players
who have the most fame,
and of course, the most attention.
They also have the best contracts,
but at the same time, they take
on the greatest responsibility.
You yourself said that before
every match, you feel nervous,
because you know
the most is expected of you.
That expectation comes from
the coach and the staff,
your teammates, the media, the fans,
and in the end, from yourself.
That sense of responsibility
is always there,
that obligation: "I have to".
I think you were right to notice that
the biggest pressure comes from me.
Because that goal I had since I was a child
kept pulling me forward so strongly.
I wanted to succeed so badly,
and I expected a lot from myself.
I wanted to be the best,
and to always give everything I had.
The fact that I wanted to be the best
might sound arrogant,
but it was really something internal,
something that pushed me every day
to give my all, on the court,
in training, and in life in general.
And that, for me, was the greatest
source of pressure.
Of course, it wasn’t easy
living with that, and I think
all top athletes feel
that kind of pressure,
which is even greater
than the pressure from
15,000-20,000 people cheering,
shouting, or the media, and so on.
The biggest pressure came from myself,
and it was always like that.
Of course, it’s extremely stressful,
but I’m really proud
that I managed to live a normal life.
My father also insisted a lot
on the importance of knowing
that in both sport and life, you have to
give 100% or even 200% for what you do.
But you have to free yourself
from that pressure in order
to live a normal life. That pressure
needs to stay on the court. -Bravo.
So over the years,
I managed to get to a point
where that pressure only exists
on match day. -You analyze...
You have to know how to quickly
let it go, because in a way,
there are two versions of you.
You-and the one who
fights on the court,
the one who would kill anyone
trying to beat me.
You have to know how to deal
with it... -Which is hard.
And you have to know
that you’re not the same.
That’s always helped me
analyze myself as a player,
and how I behave on the field,
but also adapt,
because you're not the same player,
nor the same person,
at 20 and at 40 years old.
You have to find a new leader
and a new role
within the team and on the court.
That also helped me.
You said that, and it’s perfect,
it sounds super simple,
but today it’s hard to let go of that,
especially because
it doesn’t depend on you.
There are the media and the fans.
Today, it’s hard for a player
to get out of that mindset.
Yes. -It’s hard for him
to be without pressure.
Because the pressure isn’t
only felt during the game.
Social media creates constant pressure.
You’re constantly under
a magnifying glass.
The better the player you are,
the more intense it gets.
That’s how it should be, because
you can’t completely free yourself from it,
but you’ve already mentioned
several times
that you work on yourself,
improve, and so on.
Yes. What you said is true.
Nowadays, social media
are also present.
If you want, you can spend the whole day
on your phone, on Instagram,
X, Facebook, TikTok. There’s also TV,
newspapers, podcasts.
So basically, you can
feed your ego all day long.
And if you don’t know how to step away
from it a bit and calm your ego,
to realize that you are not just that,
it can be tough.
Yes, that can consume you.
That your ego actually consumes you.
I’ve worked a lot on that,
to learn how my ego works,
how I can calm it,
how I can free myself from it.
That’s also very interesting,
as we already mentioned.
I always thought it was a shame
that as an athlete,
I have to end my career by 40,
while a singer or an actor
can do it their whole life.
But at the same time, I’ve overcome that,
and that’s where my strength lies.
Now I have to end my career
and find a new life.
You have to live a normal life
and let go of that persona and ego.
You have to understand all of that
and grow as a person, not just as a player.
Yes, exactly.
-That’s also very important.
We said that your club career
is incomparable to anyone else’s.
You mentioned the Tricolores,
the national team...
You’ve always emphasized that it’s
an honor and pride to play for France.
So-three Olympic gold medals,
four World Championship golds,
four European Championship golds,
we won’t count the silvers and bronzes.
Here in Croatia, we used to call
matches against France El Clásico.
Were we your biggest rivals?
Was it seen that way on your side as well?
Yes, that’s recognized here too.
That period between 2004-2005
up until maybe 2014,
we always played against Croatia
in the final, semifinal, or quarterfinal.
Those matches were always the hardest.
For France, of course, and for me.
I can’t describe how I feel.
I’m playing against Croatia,
and my father is from Croatia.
My roots are Croatian,
and I’m very proud of that.
When Croatia plays,
I cheer for Croatia.
Just like I do for Serbia,
and all of our former countries,
when they play handball or football.
I saw you during Croatia–France
in 1998, the semifinal,
and that was the toughest match for me.
I celebrated when you scored.
Then I was sad afterwards.
And if I play for France, I feel proud.
And those matches were always
something very difficult.
Of course, when we didn’t play
against Croatia, they all loved me.
They’d take photos with me,
and they were always nice.
But when we played Croatia,
they cursed my mom and dad.
It got so tough that I had to work
on it mentally, to prepare well.
And of course, those games
were always the hardest.
I will always remember the final
in 2009, in Zagreb,
when I saw how the fans welcomed me.
I saw my father in the stands.
The anthem started playing,
and I almost cried,
because I saw my father crying.
And my mom crying too-
it’s hard to describe.
But of course, I’m proud that
we won those matches more often.
I’m proud to play for France,
because France wins titles.
Thanks to the whole team,
but thanks to me too,
because I’m one of the best players.
France won thanks to ex-Yugoslavia.
Maybe Luka and I wouldn’t be here.
All of us, former Yugoslavians,
came to improve handball in France.
If that hadn’t happened,
France wouldn’t be where it is.
That motivated me.
And of course, those matches
against Croatia were legendary.
That team had: Balić, Džomba,
Rašković, Metličić, and others.
You were there...
They called it "El Clasico".
But France won more often.
Where was the line
that made you better?
I had coffee with Ivano lately-
he said hello to you.
We often drink coffee
in the same café in Split.
He said your team had quality
individuals and squad depth.
That’s France. We were more about
energy, quality, and craziness,
intensity, togetherness, and all that.
How did you see France’s advantage?
Croatia-strangely, I was talking
about it 2-3 days ago,
with the author writing a book.
In 2003, Croatia won
the World Championship,
in a match that maybe sparked
the rivalry with France.
Croatia lost to Argentina in Portugal,
and France was the favorite.
We lost to Croatia then.
That was the start of that generation:
Ivano, Rašković, and the rest.
We launched them, and it gave
them a lot of confidence.
In 2003, they were world champs.
In 2004, they won the Olympics.
In 2005, they beat us 2-5 in the semis
of the World Championship in Tunisia.
They had the edge.
We slowly built our team.
I was still young then-
I learned a lot in Germany.
All those individual players
went to top clubs.
Omeyer went to the Bundesliga.
I went to Kiel with Noka.
Everything I learned I brought
into the national team.
Narcisse went to Germany too,
Abalo to Ciudad Real,
Dinart to Ciudad Real to learn
from Dujshebaev and his talent.
And all he learned he brought
back to the national team.
We all went abroad and got a lot.
We were strong, mentally and physically.
We went to learn handball from
other coaches in other countries.
We brought all that experience
into the French team.
It also helped in 2007,
when we lost in Germany,
in the World Championship
semifinal, after extra time.
In the end, bad calls from refs-
it really upset us.
That was a turning point, because
after that loss, we won everything.
That defeat hit us so hard,
we said, "never again".
That’s when the killer instinct
in the team was born.
Would you say France’s rise
paralleled your own rise?
You said you were still
young in 2003? -Yes.
You were at the tournament,
but didn’t play? -Yes.
And you became the key piece,
the missing link for France.
Now looking at it as a player,
from this region,
Croatia, Slovenia, Montenegro,
North Macedonia, BiH, Serbia.
Is Croatia still the best?
Why? Is it talent, mentality,
dedication, or a mix of all that?
What sets us apart?
First, of course, mentality.
As you said-fire, and role models
young Croatians had growing up.
There was Ivano, Petar, Blaž,
Džomba, all those stars.
You can’t measure the impact
they had on the youth.
When you see someone succeed
from your country,
it tells you that you can too,
if you give it your all.
And of course, that old Balkan system
where kids constantly train sports
at school-handball, basketball...
It helps you grow. It shapes
your technique and tactics.
That’s something we lack in France.
Maybe two hours of sport
per week, four at most.
In school and college,
that’s a big advantage.
And of course, the role models
young Croats grew up with,
plus their strong technique
and deep tactical training.
Coaches from former Yugoslavia
have something France doesn’t.
That’s a big advantage too.
Of course, the domestic
league isn’t strong.
All the best players leave
to live off the sport. -Yes.
They grow like I did. With Noka,
I had a different path.
I didn’t go through Balkan school,
but I spent time with my father.
We spent lots of time at home,
playing-not just handball…
We played basketball and football.
I also learned tennis.
And he always told me:
The most important thing is
coordination of body and head.
That’s how I learned,
with my dad.
I learned what the French did well:
physical training.
In France, we worked hard
on physical strength.
We spent a lot of time in the gym,
focused on fitness.
That gave us a huge edge
over other countries,
when you had guys like Dinart,
he was a machine.
Bertrand Gille, Narcisse,
they were pure athletes.
And then, the technique and tactics
I learned from Noka,
who taught me everything
about positioning and tactics,
and how to view the game differently.
That made a huge difference.
Everything I learned from Noka,
I brought into the national team.
Onesta realized we knew
more than he did.
And he let us take charge.
All those combinations helped us
dominate international handball.
That drive and energy,
as people say,
it influences everything in this region,
especially handball.
Same with other countries.
The Serbs are great at basketball.
We’re strong in football now.
Because you need quality.
You mentioned Čavar, then later Ivano
Balić, Džomba and Duvnjak...
You need elite talent
to build mentality around.
That’s all built on top of that.
Just like we have Modrić in football.
And that’s why we’re here,
and not some other country.
You must have at least one
genius to build around.
For us, it was Ivano, right?
He’s five years older than you?
That’s a lot, but still close.
Was he special?
Do you remember the rivalry?
That iconic photo from 2009,
some called it a "dethroning".
The old lion leaves,
the young lion steps in.
Ivano was one of the best
handball players of all time.
He’s a legend, and yet we never
played on the same team.
We were always opponents.
He was in Pamplona, I was in Kiel.
We faced off in the Champions
League semifinal,
then Croatia vs France.
Like you said, a huge rivalry.
I remember, we were playing
and the score was 2:9.
The media focused only
on the Croatia-France final.
I read headlines in papers
where they quoted me,
saying things about Ivano
I never actually said.
It’s crazy how things get twisted.
I had huge respect for him.
All that was out of our control.
It was all edited like that.
But as a player, of course,
I wanted to be better than Ivano,
because any athlete’s goal
is to compete and be better
than the rest-and the best.
Still, I admired the way he played.
And I admired how Croatia played,
even though they were our rivals.
I knew-if we, as a team,
and me as a player, wanted to be
the best, we had to beat them.
We had to be better than Croatia.
I was always in that paradox
of respect and rivalry.
Because I had to be better than him.
Sadly, we never played
on the same team.
Maybe once-some charity match.
But I always respected Ivano
and that entire great generation.
That’s all for this episode.
Watch part two of the interview
with N. Karabatić in the next episode.